>> Mathew DesLauriers: So
far we've got some scene.
We've got everything animated.
We've been talking about
how to position things,
how to export them as GIF,
and things like that.
And we could go on this
sort of path a bit more.
We could try and
animate each individual cube.
Or we could try and rotate each
individual cube or something like that.
But I just wanted to move forward and
pave ahead with the next kind of concept,
which would be around shaders.
And then after we get into shaders,
we'll have a bit more time
to just relax and chill.
So for now I'm just going to close that.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So
what is a shader?
So a shader is a small little program
that looks a bit like this and
it's a small little program that
is meant to do a single task and
it's meant to do a single
task really really well.
And it's actually not even in JavaScript
so when we look at this we're gonna see
some things that look familiar but
it's using a different language.
It's called GLSL and
GLSL is a shader language for
WebGL or for OpenGL and
it has some different syntax.
It's a bit more like C
rather than JavaScript.
And it is composed of these
different things here.
So we have some stuff at
the top of the program
which specifies the floating
point precisions so,
this is sort of something that we don't
really need to deal with in JavaScript but
it's basically telling us
how precise our numbers are.
And we usually just wanna keep it at
high p which it means high precision.
That just means accurate numbers for
now and then we have some inputs.
These are our values.
Usually numbers,
sometimes like an opacity or
like some sort of information that's
stored in a number or a coordinate.
Those are coming from WebGL.
And they're called varying.
We're gonna get into what all these mean,
but I'll just walk you through them.
And it's using vec2, so
unlike JavaScript where we just say
var x is equal to 3,
we actually have to say what that type is.
So it's a bit more like c or
c++ or something like that,
or Java maybe, something like that,
where you have to say that this
variable VUV is actually of type vec2.
And vec2 is a type that means two
dimensional vector, or coordinate.
Like XY position or something like that.
And then you can also use float types.
So basically, we're just going to be
dealing with vec2s, and vec3s and vec4s.
And float types.
And then there's these other
things called uniforms, and
we're going to get into
what all these mean.
But basically, just think of shaders as
little tiny programs that look like this.
And one way to try and visualize and
conceptualize what a shader is,
is to consider an image,
like triangle, a colored triangle.
But instead of just looking at
it as an image or a graphic or
a vector image,
try to image it as a grid of pixels.
And you can zoom in on the image and
start to see that it is really just
made up of little tiny square pixels.
If we were to zoom in further,
if we were to pixellate it further,
we'd see really it is a grid.
Just like the grids we've been
working on so far in our workshop and
it's just a grid of different
squares that are different colors.
And what the shader is doing,
is the shader
is this piece of code that just says, how
does each individual pixel get colored.
And so the shader is getting run,
potentially millions of times
because the shader is getting run.
It's like a function that gets run
on every single pixel in a shape.
And so in this image,
it's a very chunky pixellated grid, and
there's maybe like a 100 or 200 or
300 of these little colored squares.
And so that shader would
have to get run 300 times.
But in real, like in real images, we're
not dealing with these big chunky pixels.
We're dealing with pixels that are so
small that we can hardly even see them.
And so really in this kind of an image,
you might have a shader
that's run a million times, because it's
being run for each individual pixel.
And the shader is just
running on those pixels, and
it doesn't know anything about the other
pixels this is something that's one
of the core concepts of
working with shaders.
And it really changes the way you have
to think about writing your code.
You can no longer say that
I have a pixel that's
blue because the pixel next to it is red.
You have to only say that
this pixel is blue because.
It doesn't know anything
about its neighbors.
So a shader, it has to be the same
code that runs across all these
different pixels, and it's just simply
there's too many pixels for it to have
information about what's happening in
the pixel up here or the pixel down here.
Just all it knows is, okay,
I'm gonna make something blue,
I'm gonna make something red,
pink, yellow, that's all.
And so this is kind of what we're gonna
try and pick apart and dissect today.
And there's some helper functions
as well that we're gonna work with,
just like we did with three.js.
So it'll hopefully make it easier,
but yeah, we're gonna work on that.
And so let's say we're, for example,
gonna try and reproduce this image,
this exact image with a shader.
This is a very simple image to start with.
And it's just a grayed-in
from gray to white.
And it might look like this if we were to
recreate this exact image with a shader.
And the way it's going to work is that
we specify a precision at the top.
This is kind of you copy paste it,
you always use the same one,
precision hype float.
And then we have some variables.
So in JavaScript we just have our
x is equal to five or whatever.
Whereas in shaders we have two different
types of variables that we can think of in
a fragment shader.
And sorry we're talking about specific
type of shader that renders pixels.
That's just kind of something
that we're talking about today.
There's other types of shaders in
more complex applications that render
different types of functions, sometimes
you'll actually use shaders in like
machine learning or competition that
doesn't actually render anything,
it's used for really fast programming and
really fast competition.
We're just talking about
creating color with shaders, and
so back to this thing here.
So there's two types.
There's something called varying and
a varying is a,
usually a coordinate or a number or
a value that's coming from WebGL,
and the reason it's called varying is
because if you're to imagine the surface,
the value changes,
it varies across the surface.
As it moves across the surface
the value is not the same.
So up here the value might be one or
two or three or
whatever down here might be a different
value that's why it's called varying.
This other type of data
we're working with.
And shaders is called uniform.
So those are the two types varyings and
uniforms and uniform, it's called uniform
because the value is the same across all
of the different pixels in our surface.
It's uniformly constant.
It's uniform.
So those are the two types of data that
we have to try and remember to try and
wrap our heads around.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So back to this
image, we have a varying which is called
vec2, VUV which is basically
a 2D coordinate called VUV,
which is a UV coordinate and if you
remember back to earlier in the workshop.
We we're dealing with the grid and we had
the top left to the grid was zero zero,
and the bottom right of
the grid was one one,
and I was referring to that as UNV,
this is very similar.
This is using UNV
coordinate just to classify
where in the surface of the image we are.
And so in this image, the UNV coordinate
might be similar where you know,
on one end is zero zero and
on the other end is one one.
Something a bit like that.
It's a very similar concept.
And then, what we can do is
we can create a color and
an opacity, using this varying value.
We can create the color,
using the X property of the vector,
and that's basically just saying I
want the U coordinate, and we can
then wrap that with this structure
called a vec3, and then we can
create an opacity which is just gonna be
one for now, which means 100% opacity.
And when we wrap that structure, because
we have a three component structure here,
and a one component here, that ends
up being four different components.
That's why we call it vec4.
So it's some new concepts, and we're
gonna try and work our way through it.
But this goes back to this UV coordinate
grid that I was chatting about before.
So let's say you were to
create this gradient ramp.
You might end up with this thing, where
gl_FragColor is sort of the output color,
that's what your pixel
is gonna end up being.
And you would assign that to an RGB value.
And in this case, if you just
specify a single value for vec3,
you end up with the same red,
green, and blue.
So you create a grayscale image.
So this is using the U coordinate,
which goes from zero to one.
We can also use the V coordinate, or
if you do dot Y to access the second
coordinate of our UV coordinates.
You can end up with a gradient
that goes from one to zero.
One little gotcha is that in
the morning we were talking about
top left being zero zero and
bottom right being one one.
It's a, in WebGL quite often things
are flipped, inverted on the y axis.
And so in this case, the top of
the image is actually gonna be white or
one, and the bottom is gonna be black.
Just something to note that if sometimes
you're creating something that looks
upside down, it's because WebGL
just sometimes will use a different
coordinate system, where the Y axis
is flipped sort of upside down.